s3proxy: add new page to documentation (#2417)
edgelesssys/constellation: docs/docs/workflows/s3proxy.md

For example, objects uploaded with `CreateMultipartUpload` aren't encrypted.
- Using the [Range](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetObject.html#API_GetObject_RequestSyntax) header on `GetObject` is currently not supported and will result in an error.

If you want to use s3proxy but these limitations stop you from doing so, please consider [opening](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&projects=&template=feature_request.yml) an issue.

## Deployment

- `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/edgelesssys/constellation/main/s3proxy/deploy/deployment-s3proxy.yaml`
- Replace the values named `replaceme` in `deployment-s3proxy.yaml` with valid AWS credentials. These credentials are used by s3proxy to access your S3 buckets.
- `kubectl apply -f deployment-s3proxy.yaml`

s3proxy is now deployed.
If you want to run a demo application, checkout the [Filestash with s3proxy](../getting-started/examples/filstash-s3proxy.md) example.

## Technical details

### Encryption

s3proxy relies on Google's [Tink Cryptographic Library](https://developers.google.com/tink) to implement cryptographic operations securely.

> The used cryptographic primitives are [NIST SP 800 38f](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-38F.pdf) for keywrapping and [AES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard)-[GCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Galois/counter_(GCM)) with 256 bit keys for data encryption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The used cryptographic primitives are [NIST SP 800 38f](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-38F.pdf) for key wrapping and [AES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard)-[GCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Galois/counter_(GCM)) with 256 bit keys for data encryption.
```

s3proxy uses [envelope encryption](https://cloud.google.com/kms/docs/envelope-encryption) to encrypt objects.
That means s3proxy uses a key encryption key (KEK) issued by the Constellation KMS to encrypt data encryption keys (DEK).

> Each S3 object is encrypted with it's own DEK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each S3 object is encrypted with its own DEK.
```

The encrypted DEK is then saved as metadata of the encrypted object.
This enables key rotation of the KEK without re-encrypting the data in S3.
The approach also allows access to objects from different locations, as long as each location has access to the KEK.

### Traffic interception

To use s3proxy you have to redirect your outbound AWS S3 traffic to s3proxy.
This can either be done by modifying your client application or by changing the deployment of your application.

> The necessary deployment modifications are to add DNS redirection and a trusted TLS certificate to the client's trust store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The necessary deployment modifications are to add DNS redirection and a trusted TLS certificate to the client's certificate trust store.
```

> DNS redirection can be defined for each pod allowing you to test s3proxy for one application, without changing other applications in the same cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DNS redirection can be defined for each pod, allowing you to test s3proxy for one application without changing other applications in the same cluster.
```

Adding a trusted TLS certificate is necessary as clients communicate with s3proxy via HTTPS.

> To have your client application trust s3proxy's TLS certificate, the certificate has to be added to the client's truststore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To have your client application trust s3proxy's TLS certificate, the certificate has to be added to the client's trust store.
```

# Install s3proxy

Constellation includes a transparent encryption proxy for [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/de/s3/).
s3proxy will encrypt/decrypt objects when you send/retrieve objects to/from S3, without making changes to your application necessary.

## Limitations

:::caution
Using s3proxy outside Constellation is insecure as the connection between the key management service (KMS) and s3proxy is protected by Constellation's WireGuard VPN.
The VPN is a feature of Constellation and won't be present by default in other environments.

> :::

Author: If one would manage to deploy C11n's keyservice in another cluster things should start just fine. But this doesn't happen by accident. Originally added based on @3u13r's suggestion. Pinging him for visibility.

These limitations will be removed with future iterations of s3proxy.

- Only `PutObject` and `GetObject` requests are encrypted/decrypted by s3proxy.
That means other requests are forwarded to S3 as-is.

> For example, objects uploaded with `CreateMultipartUpload` aren't encrypted.

Reviewer 2: can we change the behavior so that calls that would expose unencrypted object data fail instead?

Author: Recap of phone conversation: decided to implement `insecure` flag for now that allows users to trigger the current behavior. By default these requests will be blocked.

Author: #2420 adds the discussed flag. Rephrased section to reflect new situation.

- Using the [Range](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetObject.html#API_GetObject_RequestSyntax) header on `GetObject` is currently not supported and will result in an error.

If you want to use s3proxy but these limitations stop you from doing so, please consider [opening](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&projects=&template=feature_request.yml) an issue.

## Deployment

> - `git clone git@github.com:edgelesssys/constellation.git && cd constellation`

Reviewer 2: You only need one file right? So can we replace this with `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/edgelesssys/constellation/main/s3proxy/deploy/deployment-s3proxy.yaml` ?

- Replace the values named `replaceme` in `s3proxy/deploy/deployment-s3proxy.yaml` with valid AWS credentials. These credentials are used by s3proxy to access your S3 buckets.
- `kubectl apply -f s3proxy/deploy/deployment-s3proxy.yaml`

s3proxy is now deployed.
If you want to run a demo application you can checkout the [Deploy Filestash](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation/tree/main/s3proxy/deploy#deploying-filestash) instructions to deploy Filestash.

> Filestash is a web frontend for different storage backends, including S3.

Reviewer 2: add this to the examples section of the docs and try making it a bit prettier like the existing examples

## Technical details

### Encryption

s3proxy relies on Google's [Tink Cryptographic Library](https://developers.google.com/tink) to implement cryptographic operations securely.
The used cryptographic primitives are [NIST SP 800 38f](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-38F.pdf) for key wrapping and [AES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard)-[GCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Galois/counter_(GCM)) with 256 bit keys for data encryption.

s3proxy uses [envelope encryption](https://cloud.google.com/kms/docs/envelope-encryption) to encrypt objects.

> That means s3proxy uses a key encryption key (KEK) issued by the Constellation KMS to encrypt data encryption keys (DEK).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means it uses a key encryption key (KEK) issued by the [KeyService](../architecture/microservices.md#keyservice) to encrypt data encryption keys (DEKs).
```
we stopped calling it KMS at some point to avoid confusion with external KMSs

Each S3 object is encrypted with its own DEK.
The encrypted DEK is then saved as metadata of the encrypted object.
This enables key rotation of the KEK without re-encrypting the data in S3.
The approach also allows access to objects from different locations, as long as each location has access to the KEK.

### Traffic interception

> To use s3proxy you have to redirect your outbound AWS S3 traffic to s3proxy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use s3proxy, you have to redirect your outbound S3 traffic to s3proxy.
```

This can either be done by modifying your client application or by changing the deployment of your application.

The necessary deployment modifications are to add DNS redirection and a trusted TLS certificate to the client's trust store.
DNS redirection can be defined for each pod, allowing you to test s3proxy for one application without changing other applications in the same cluster.
Adding a trusted TLS certificate is necessary as clients communicate with s3proxy via HTTPS.
To have your client application trust s3proxy's TLS certificate, the certificate has to be added to the client's certificate trust store.

> The above [deployment example](#deployment) shows how all this can be done using cert-manager and the [hostAliases](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/network/customize-hosts-file-for-pods/) key.

Author: I changed the last sentece to point to the example and added a bit more explanation to the example. The example now points out and explains all required changes.

By default, s3proxy will block requests that may expose unencrypted data to S3 (e.g. UploadPart).
The `allow-multipart` flag disables request blocking for evaluation purposes.
- Using the [Range](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetObject.html#API_GetObject_RequestSyntax) header on `GetObject` is currently not supported and will result in an error.

These limitations will be removed with future iterations of s3proxy.
If you want to use s3proxy but these limitations stop you from doing so, consider [opening an issue](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&projects=&template=feature_request.yml).

## Deployment

You can add the s3proxy to your Constellation cluster as follows:
1. Download the deployment manifest:
   ```bash
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/edgelesssys/constellation/main/s3proxy/deploy/deployment-s3proxy.yaml
   ```
2. Replace the values named `replaceme` in `deployment-s3proxy.yaml` with valid AWS credentials. These credentials are used by s3proxy to access your S3 buckets.
3. Deploy s3proxy:
   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f deployment-s3proxy.yaml
   ```

> s3proxy is now deployed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

s3proxy uses [envelope encryption](https://cloud.google.com/kms/docs/envelope-encryption) to encrypt objects.
This means s3proxy uses a key encryption key (KEK) issued by the [KeyService](../architecture/microservices.md#keyservice) to encrypt data encryption keys (DEKs).
Each S3 object is encrypted with its own DEK.
The encrypted DEK is then saved as metadata of the encrypted object.
This enables key rotation of the KEK without re-encrypting the data in S3.
The approach also allows access to objects from different locations, as long as each location has access to the KEK.

### Traffic interception

To use s3proxy, you have to redirect your outbound S3 traffic to s3proxy.
This can either be done by modifying your client application or by changing the deployment of your application.

The necessary deployment modifications are to add DNS redirection and a trusted TLS certificate to the client's trust store.

> DNS redirection can be defined for each pod, allowing you to test s3proxy for one application without changing other applications in the same cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DNS redirection can be defined for each pod, allowing you to use s3proxy for one application without changing other applications in the same cluster.
```
I'd say this may not only be for testing, but also for cases where you have both confidential and non-confidential data/apps in your cluster.

Adding a trusted TLS certificate is necessary as clients communicate with s3proxy via HTTPS.
To have your client application trust s3proxy's TLS certificate, the certificate has to be added to the client's certificate trust store.

> The [Filestash with s3proxy](../getting-started/examples/filstash-s3proxy.md) example shows how this is realized using an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Filestash with s3proxy](../getting-started/examples/filstash-s3proxy.md) example shows how to do this.
```
duplicate word "example"
